{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.10586}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 What is Python?\par
Introduction: Python is a general-purpose programming language known for its simplicity and ease of use. Python is used in many fields like data science and machine learning, web development, scripting and automation, embedded systems and IoT, and much more.\par
Common Use Cases: Python is used in data science, machine learning, web development, cybersecurity, automation and microcomputers like the Raspberry Pi and MicroPython-compatible boards.\par
Variables\par
Declaring Variables: To declare a variable, you start with the variable name followed by the assignment operator (=) and then the value. This can be a number, string, boolean, etc. Here are some examples:\par
name = 'John Doe'\par
age = 25\par
Naming Conventions for Variables: Here are the naming conventions you should use for variables:\par
\par
Variable names can only start with a letter or an underscore (_), not a number.\par
Variable names can only contain alphanumeric characters (a-z, A-Z, 0-9) and underscores (_).\par
Variable names are case-sensitive \f1\emdash  age, Age, and AGE are all considered unique.\par
Variable names cannot be one of Python\rquote s reserved keywords such as if, class, or def.\par
Variables names with multiple words are separated by underscores. Ex. snake_case.\par
Comments\par
Single Line Comments: These types of comments should be used for short notes you wish to leave in your code.\par
# This is a single line comment\par
Multi-line Strings: These types of strings can be used to leave larger notes or to comment out sections of code.\par
"""\par
This is a multi-line string.\par
Here is some code commented out.\par
\par
name = 'John Doe'\par
age = 25\par
"""\par
print() Function: To print data to the console, you can use the print() function like this:\par
print('Hello world!') # Hello world!\par
Common Data Types in Python\par
Introduction: Python is a dynamically-typed language like JavaScript, meaning you don't need to explicitly declare types for variables. The language knows what the type of a variable is based on what you assign to the variable.\par
Integer: A whole number without decimals:\par
my_integer_var = 10\par
print('Integer:', my_integer_var) # Integer: 10\par
Float: A number with decimals:\par
my_float_var = 4.50\par
print('Float:', my_float_var) # Float: 4.5\par
String: A sequence of characters wrapped in quotes:\par
my_string_var = 'hello'\par
print('String:', my_string_var) # String: hello\par
Boolean: A value representing either True or False:\par
my_boolean_var = True\par
print('Boolean:', my_boolean_var) # Boolean: True\par
Set: An unordered collection of unique elements:\par
my_set_var = \{7, 5, 8\}\par
print('Set:', my_set_var) # Set: \{7, 5, 8\}\par
Dictionary: A collection of key-value pairs, enclosed in curly braces:\par
my_dictionary_var = \{"name": "Alice", "age": 25\}\par
print('Dictionary:', my_dictionary_var) # Dictionary: \{'name': 'Alice', 'age': 25\}\par
Tuple: An immutable ordered collection, enclosed in parentheses:\par
my_tuple_var = (7, 5, 8)\par
print('Tuple:', my_tuple_var) # Tuple: (7, 5, 8)\par
Range: A sequence of numbers, often used in loops:\par
my_range_var = range(5)\par
print(my_range_var) # range(0, 5)\par
List: An ordered collection of elements that supports different data types:\par
my_list = [22, 'Hello world', 3.14, True]\par
print(my_list) # [22, 'Hello world', 3.14, True]\par
None: A special value that represents the absence of a value:\par
my_none_var = None\par
print('None:', my_none_var) # None: None\par
Immutable and Mutable Types\par
Immutable Types: These types cannot change once declared, although you can point their variables at something new, which is called reassignment. They include integer, float, complex, boolean, string, tuple, range, and None.\par
Mutable Types: These types can change once declared. You can add, remove, or update their items. They include collection types such as list, set, and dictionary.\par
type() Function: To see the type for a variable, you can use the type() function like this:\par
greeting = 'Hello there!'\par
age = 21\par
\par
print(type(greeting)) # <class 'str'>\par
print(type(age)) # <class 'int'>\par
isinstance() Function: This is used to check if a variable matches a specific data type:\par
greeting = 'Hello world'\par
name = 'John Doe'\par
\par
print(isinstance(greeting, str)) # True\par
print(isinstance(name, int)) # False\par
Working with Strings\par
Definition: As you recall from JavaScript, strings are immutable which means you can not change them after they have been created. In Python, you can use either single or double quotes. It is recommended to choose a rule and stick with it:\par
developer = 'Jessica'\par
city = "Los Angeles"\par
Accessing Characters from Strings: You can access characters from strings by using bracket notation like this:\par
my_str = 'Hello world'\par
\par
print(my_str[0])  # H\par
print(my_str[6])  # w\par
\par
print(my_str[-1])  # d\par
print(my_str[-2]) # l\par
Escaping Strings: You can use a backslash (\\) if your string contains quotes like this:\par
msg = 'It\\'s a sunny day'\par
quote = "She said, \\"Hello!\\""\par
String Concatenation: To concatenate strings, you can use the + operator like this:\par
developer = 'Jessica'\par
print('My name is ' + developer + '.') # My name is Jessica.\par
Another way to concatenate strings is by using the += operator. This is used to perform concatenation and assignment in the same step like this:\par
\par
greeting = 'My name is '\par
developer = 'Jessica.'\par
\par
greeting += developer\par
print(greeting) # My name is Jessica.\par
f-strings: This is short for formatted string literals. It allows you to handle interpolation and also do some concatenation with a compact and readable syntax:\par
developer = 'Jessica'\par
greeting = f'My name is \{developer\}.'\par
print(greeting) # My name is Jessica.\par
String Slicing: This is when you can extract portions of a string. Here is the basic syntax:\par
str[start:stop:step]\par
The start position represents the index where the extraction should begin. The stop position is where the slice should end. This position is non inclusive. The step position represents the interval to increment for the slicing. Here are some examples:\par
\par
message = 'Python is fun!'\par
\par
print(message[0:6])  # Python\par
print(message[7:])  # is fun!\par
print(message[::2])  # Pto sfn\par
Getting the Length of a String: The len() function is used to return the number of the characters in the string:\par
developer = 'Jessica'\par
\par
print(len(developer)) # 7\par
Working with the in operator\par
in Operator: This returns a boolean that specifies whether the character or characters exist in the string or not:\par
my_str = 'Hello world'\par
\par
print('Hello' in my_str)  # True\par
print('hey' in my_str)    # False\par
print('hi' in my_str)    # False\par
print('e' in my_str)  # True\par
print('f' in my_str)  # False\par
Common String Methods\par
str.upper(): This returns a new string with all characters converted to uppercase:\par
developer = 'Jessica'\par
\par
print(developer.upper()) # JESSICA\par
str.lower(): This returns a new string with all characters converted to lowercase:\par
developer = 'Jessica'\par
\par
print(developer.lower()) # jessica\par
str.strip(): This returns a copy of the string with specified leading and trailing characters removed (if no argument is passed to the method, it removes leading and trailing whitespace).\par
greeting = '  hello world  '\par
\par
trimmed_my_str = greeting.strip()\par
print(trimmed_my_str)  # 'hello world'\par
replace(): This returns a new string with all occurrences of the old string replaced by a new one.\par
greeting = 'hello world'\par
\par
replaced_my_str = greeting.replace('hello', 'hi')\par
print(replaced_my_str)  # 'hi world'\par
split(): This is used to split a string into a list using a specified separator. A separator is a string specifying where the split should happen.\par
dashed_name = 'example-dashed-name'\par
\par
split_words = dashed_name.split('-')\par
print(split_words)  # ['example', 'dashed', 'name']\par
join(): This is used to join elements of an iterable into a string with a separator. An iterable is a collection of elements that can be looped over like a list, string or a tuple.\par
example_list = ['example', 'dashed', 'name']\par
\par
joined_str = ' '.join(example_list)\par
print(joined_str)  # example dashed name\par
str.startswith(prefix): This returns a boolean indicating if a string starts with the specified prefix:\par
developer = 'Naomi'\par
\par
result = developer.startswith('N')\par
print(result)  # True\par
str.endswith(suffix): This returns a boolean indicating if a string ends with the specified suffix:\par
developer = 'Naomi'\par
\par
result = developer.endswith('N')\par
print(result)  # False\par
str.find(): This returns the index for the first occurrence of a substring. If one is not found, then -1 is returned:\par
developer = 'Naomi'\par
\par
result = developer.find('N')\par
print(result)  # 0\par
\par
city = 'Los Angeles'\par
print(city.find('New')) # -1\par
str.count(substring): This counts how many times a substring appears in a string:\par
city = 'Los Angeles'\par
print(city.count('e')) # 2\par
str.capitalize(): This returns a new string with the first character capitalized and the other characters lowercased:\par
dessert = 'chocolate cake'\par
print(dessert.capitalize()) # Chocolate cake\par
str.isupper(): This returns True if all letters in the string are uppercase and False if otherwise:\par
dessert = 'chocolate cake'\par
print(dessert.isupper()) # False\par
str.islower(): This returns True if all letters in the string are lowercase and False if otherwise:\par
dessert = 'chocolate cake'\par
print(dessert.islower()) # True\par
str.title(): This returns a new string with the first letter of each word capitalized:\par
city = 'los angeles'\par
print(city.title()) # Los Angeles\par
str.maketrans(): This method is used to create a table of 1 to 1 character mappings for translation. It is often used with the translate() method which applies that table to a string and return the translated result.\par
trans_table = str.maketrans('abc', '123')\par
print(trans_table) # \{97: 49, 98: 50, 99: 51\}\par
\par
result = 'abcabc'.translate(trans_table)\par
print(result)  # 123123\par
Common Operations used with Integers and Floats\par
Basic Math Operations: In Python, you can do basic math operations with integers and floats including addition, subtraction, multiplication and division:\par
int_1 = 56\par
int_2 = 12\par
float_1 = 5.4\par
float_2 = 12.0\par
\par
# Addition\par
\par
print('Integer Addition:', int_1 + int_2) # Integer Addition: 68\par
print('Float Addition:', float_1 + float_2) # Float Addition: 17.4\par
\par
# Subtraction\par
\par
print('Int Subtraction:', int_1 - int_2) # Int Subtraction: 44\par
print('Float Subtraction:',  float_2 - float_1) # Float Subtraction: 6.6\par
\par
# Multiplication\par
\par
print('Int Multiplication:', int_1 * int_2) # Int Multiplication: 672\par
print('Float Multiplication:', float_2 * float_1) # Float Multiplication: 64.80000000000001\par
\par
# Division\par
\par
print('Division:', int_1 / int_2) # Division: 4.666666666666667\par
print('Float Division:', float_2 / float_1) # Float Division: 2.222222222222222\par
When you add a float and an integer, the result will be converted to a float like this:\par
\par
int_1 = 56\par
float_1 = 5.4\par
\par
print(int_1 + float_1) # 61.4\par
Modulo Operator (%): This returns the remainder when a number is divided by another number:\par
int_1 = 56\par
int_2 = 12\par
\par
print(int_1 % int_2) # 8\par
Floor Division (//): This operator is used to divide two numbers and round down the result to the nearest whole number:\par
int_1 = 56\par
int_2 = 12\par
\par
print(int_1 // int_2) # 4\par
Exponentiation Operator (**): This operator is used to raise a number to the power of another:\par
int_1 = 4\par
int_2 = 2\par
\par
print(int_1 ** int_2) # 16\par
float() Function: You can use this function to convert an integer to float.\par
num = 4\par
\par
print(float(num)) # 4.0\par
int() Function: You can use this function to convert an float to an integer.\par
num = 4.0\par
\par
print(int(num)) # 4\par
round() Function: This is used to round a number to the nearest whole integer:\par
num_1 = 3.4\par
num_2 = 7.7\par
\par
print(round(num_1)) # 3\par
print(round(num_2)) # 8\par
abs() Function: This is used to return the absolute value of a number:\par
num = -13\par
\par
print(abs(num)) # 13\par
pow() Function: This is used to raise a number to the power of another:\par
result = pow(2, 3) \par
print(result)  # 8\par
Augmented Assignments\par
Definition: Augmented assignment combines a binary operation with an assignment in one step. It takes a variable, applies an operation to it with another value, and stores the result back into the same variable.\par
# Addition assignment \par
my_var = 10\par
my_var += 5\par
\par
print(my_var) # 15\par
\par
# Subtraction assignment\par
count = 14\par
count -= 3\par
\par
print(count) # 11\par
\par
# Multiplication assignment \par
product = 65\par
product *= 7\par
\par
print(product) # 455\par
\par
# Division assignment \par
price = 100\par
price /= 4\par
\par
print(price) # 25.0\par
\par
# Floor Division assignment \par
total_pages = 23\par
total_pages //= 5\par
\par
print(total_pages) # 4\par
\par
# Modulo assignment \par
bits = 35\par
bits %= 2\par
\par
print(bits) # 1\par
\par
# Exponentiation assignment \par
power = 2\par
power **= 3\par
\par
print(power) # 8\par
There are other augmented assignment operators too, like those for bitwise operators. They include &=, ^=, >>=, and <<=.\par
\par
Working with Functions\par
Definition: Functions are reusable pieces of code that take inputs (arguments) and returns an output. To call a function, you need to reference the function name followed by a set of parenthesis:\par
# Defining a function\par
\par
def get_sum(num_1, num_2):\par
    return num_1 + num_2\par
\par
result = get_sum(3, 4) # function call\par
print(result) # 7\par
If a function does not explicitly return a value, then the default return value is None:\par
\par
def greet():\par
    print('hello') \par
\par
result = greet() # hello\par
print(result) # None\par
You can also supply default values to parameters like this:\par
\par
def get_sum(num_1, num_2=2):\par
    return num_1 + num_2\par
\par
result = get_sum(3) \par
print(result) # 5\par
If you call the function without the correct number of arguments, you will get a TypeError:\par
\par
def calculate_sum(a, b):\par
    print(a + b)\par
\par
calculate_sum()\par
\par
# TypeError: calculate_sum() missing 2 required positional arguments: 'a' and 'b'\par
Common Built-in Functions\par
input() Function: This is used to prompt the user for some input:\par
name = input('What is your name?') # User types 'Kolade' and presses Enter  \par
print('Hello', name) # Hello Kolade\par
int() Function: This is used to convert a number, boolean, or a numeric string into an integer:\par
print(int(3.14)) # 3\par
print(int('42')) # 42\par
print(int(True)) # 1\par
print(int(False)) # 0 \par
Scope in Python\par
Local Scope: This is when a variable declared inside a function or class can only be accessed within that function or class.\par
def my_func():\par
    num = 10\par
    print(num)\par
Enclosing Scope: This is when a function that's nested inside another function can access the variables of the function it's nested within.\par
def outer_func():\par
    msg = 'Hello there!'\par
    \par
    def inner_func():\par
        print(msg)\par
    inner_func()\par
\par
print(outer_func()) # Hello there!\par
Global Scope: This refers to variables that are declared outside any functions or classes which can be accessed from anywhere in the program.\par
tax = 0.70 \par
\par
def get_total(subtotal):\par
    total = subtotal + (subtotal * tax)\par
    return total\par
\par
print(get_total(100))  # 170.0\par
Built-in Scope: Reserved names in Python for predefined functions, modules, keywords, and objects.\par
print(str(45)) # '45'\par
print(type(3.14)) # <class 'float'>\par
print(isinstance(3, str)) # False\par
Comparison Operators\par
Equal (==): Checks if two values are equal:\par
print(3 == 4) # False\par
Not equal (!=): Checks if two values are not equal:\par
print(3 != 4) # True\par
Strictly greater than (>): Checks if one value is greater than another:\par
print(3 > 4) # False\par
Strictly less than (<): Checks if one value is less than another:\par
print(3 < 4) # True\par
Greater than or equal(>=): Checks if one value is greater than or equal to another:\par
print(3 >= 4) # False\par
Less than or equal(<=): Checks if one value is less than or equal to another:\par
print(3 <= 4) # True\par
Working with if, elif and else Statements\par
if Statements: These are conditions used to determine if something is true or not. If the condition evaluates to True, then that block of code will run.\par
age = 18\par
\par
if age >= 18:\par
    print('You are an adult') # You are an adult\par
elif Clause: These are conditions that come after an if statement. An elif clause runs only if all previous conditions evaluate to False and its own condition evaluates to True.\par
age = 16\par
\par
if age >= 18:\par
    print('You are an adult')\par
elif age >= 13:\par
    print('You are a teenager')  # You are a teenager\par
else Clause: This will run if no other conditions evaluate to True.\par
age = 12\par
\par
if age >= 18:\par
    print('You are an adult')\par
elif age >= 13:\par
    print('You are a teenager')\par
else:\par
    print('You are a child')  # You are a child\par
You can also use nested if statements like this:\par
\par
is_citizen = True\par
age = 25\par
\par
if is_citizen:\par
    if age >= 18:\par
        print('You are eligible to vote') # You are eligible to vote\par
else:\par
    print('You are not eligible to vote')\par
Truthy and Falsy Values\par
Definition: In Python, every value has an inherent boolean value, or a built-in sense of whether it should be treated as True or False in a logical context. Many values are considered truthy, that is, they evaluate to True in a logical context. Others are falsy, meaning they evaluate to False. Here are some examples of falsy values:\par
None\par
False\par
Integer 0\par
Float 0.0\par
Empty strings ''\par
Other values like non-zero numbers, and non-empty strings are truthy.\par
\par
Working with the bool() Function\par
Definition: If you want to check whether a value is truthy or falsy, you can use the built-in bool() function. It explicitly converts a value to its boolean equivalent and returns True for truthy values and False for falsy values. Here are a few examples:\par
print(bool(False)) # False\par
print(bool(0))  # False\par
print(bool('')) # False\par
\par
print(bool(True)) # True\par
print(bool(1)) # True\par
print(bool('Hello')) # True\par
Boolean Operators and Short-circuiting\par
Definition: These are special operators that allow you to combine multiple expressions to create more complex decision-making logic in your code. There are three Boolean operators in Python: and, or, and not.\par
and Operator: This operator takes two operands and returns the first operand if it is falsy, otherwise, it returns the second operand. Both operands must be truthy for an expression to result in a truthy value.\par
is_citizen = True\par
age = 25\par
\par
print(is_citizen and age) # 25\par
You can also use the and operator in conditionals like this:\par
\par
is_citizen = True\par
age = 25\par
\par
if is_citizen and age >= 18:\par
    print('You are eligible to vote') # You are eligible to vote\par
else:\par
    print('You are not eligible to vote')\par
or Operator: This operator returns the first operand if it is truthy, otherwise, it returns the second operand. An or expression results in a truthy value if at least one operand is truthy. Here is an example:\par
age = 19\par
is_employed = False\par
\par
print(age or is_employed) # 19\par
Just like with the and operator, you can use the or operator in conditionals like this:\par
\par
age = 19\par
is_student = True\par
\par
if age < 18 or is_student:\par
    print('You are eligible for a student discount') # You are eligible for a student discount\par
else:\par
    print('You are not eligible for a student discount')\par
Short-circuiting: The and and or operators are known as a short-circuit operators. Short-circuiting means Python checks values from left to right and stops as soon as it determines the final result.\par
not Operator: This operator takes a single operand and inverts its boolean value. It converts truthy values to False and falsy values to True. Unlike the previous operators we looked at, not always returns True or False. Here are some examples:\par
print(not '') # True, because empty string is falsy\par
print(not 'Hello') # False, because non-empty string is truthy\par
print(not 0) # True, because 0 is falsy\par
print(not 1) # False, because 1 is truthy\par
print(not False) # True, because False is falsy\par
print(not True) # False, because True is truthy\par
Here is an example of the not operator in a conditional:\par
\par
is_admin = False\par
\par
if not is_admin:\par
    print('Access denied for non-administrators.') # Access denied for non-administrators.\par
else:\par
    print('Welcome, Administrator!')\f0\par
}
 